chore(cli, docs): update typed routes (#22848)
expo/expo: docs/pages/router/reference/typed-routes.mdx

---

> title: Typed Routes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Typed routes
```

> description: Learn how to use statically typed links and routes in Expo Router

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn how to use statically typed links and routes in Expo Router.
```

---

import { Terminal } from '~/ui/components/Snippet';
import { Tabs, Tab } from '~/ui/components/Tabs';
import { FileTree } from '~/ui/components/FileTree';

> > Expo Router supports standard TypeScript out of the box. [Learn how to setup TypeScript today](/guides/typescript/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Expo Router supports standard TypeScript out of the box. See [TypeScript](/guides/typescript/) guide for more information on how to set it up.
```

> While the feature is in beta, you can enable it by setting `experiments.typedRoutes` to `true` in your **app.json**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the feature is in beta, you can enable it by setting `experiments.typedRoutes` to `true` in your **app.json**:
```

```json app.json
{
  "expo": {
    "experiments": {
      "typedRoutes": true
    }
  }
}
```

> Now run `npx expo start` to start the development server. You should now be able to use autocomplete in the Expo Router `<Link />` component's `href` prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now run `npx expo start` to start the development server. You can now use autocomplete in the Expo Router `<Link />` component's `href` prop.
```

## Statically typed routes

Components and functions that use `Href<T>` will now by statically typed and have a much stricter definition. For example:

```tsx
✅ <Link href="/about" />
✅ <Link href="/user/1" />
✅ <Link href={`/user/${id}`} />
✅ <Link href={("/user" + id) as Href} />
// TypeScript errors if href is not a valid route
❌ <Link href="/usser/1" />
```

For dynamic routes, Href's need to be objects and their parameters are strictly typed:

```tsx
✅ <Link href={{ pathname: "/user/[id]", params: { id: 1 }}} />
// TypeScript errors as href is valid, but it should be a HrefObject with params
❌ <Link href="/user/[id]" />
// TypeScript errors as params contain invalid keys
❌ <Link href={{ pathname: "/user/[id]", params: { _id: 1 }}} />
// TypeScript errors as params contain unknown keys
❌ <Link href={{ pathname: "/user/[id]", params: { id: 1, id2: 2 }}} />
```

### Relative paths

> Statically typed routes do not support relative paths. You'll need to use absolute paths for all routes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Statically typed routes do not support relative paths. You'll need to use absolute paths for all routes:
```

```tsx
✅ <Link href="/about" />

// Relative paths are not supported
❌ <Link href="./about" />
```

You can leverage the `useSegments()` hooks from `expo-router` to create complex relative paths. Consider the following structure:

<FileTree
  files={[
    'app/(feed)/_layout.js',
    'app/(feed)/feed.js',
    'app/(feed)/search.js',
    'app/(feed)/profile.js',
    'app/(search)/profile.js',
    'components/button.js',
  ]}
/>

You can ensure that you push to the same tab by using the `useSegments()` hook to get the first segment of the current route.

```tsx button.js
import { Link, useSegments } from 'expo-router';

export function Button() {
  const [
    // This will be either `(feed)` or `(search)` depending on the current tab.
    first,
  ] = useSegments();

  return <Link href={`/${first}/profile`}>Push profile</Link>;
}
```

> Now, you can leverage `<Button />` from both `app/(feed)/feed.js` and `app/(search)/search.js` to push `./profile` while preserving the current tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, you can leverage `<Button />` from both **app/(feed)/feed.js** and **app/(search)/search.js** to push `./profile` while preserving the current tab.
```

## Changes made to the environment

When typed routes is enabled, Expo CLI will generate a git ignored **expo-env.d.ts** file in your project's root directory, update the **.gitignore** to ignore the new root **expo-env.d.ts** file, and modify the **tsconfig.json** to include the new **expo-env.d.ts** file.

The `includes` field in your **tsconfig.json** gets updated to include **expo-env.d.ts** and a hidden **.expo** directory. These entries are required and should not be removed from the file.

> The generated **expo-env.d.ts** should not be removed or changed at any time. It should not be committed and should be ignored by version control. For example, do not add it inside the **.gitignore**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The generated **expo-env.d.ts** should not be removed or changed at any time. It should not be committed and should be ignored by version control. For example, don't add it inside the **.gitignore**.
```

### Global types

Expo CLI will add the following global types to your project when typed routes is enabled:

- Sets `process.env.NODE_ENV = "development" | "production" | "test"`
- Allows the importing of `.[css|sass|scss]` files
- Sets the exports of `*.module.[css|sass|scss]` to be `Record<string, string`
- Add types for Metro's `require.context`. This is enabled by `expo/metro-config` and used for static route generation.

### React Native Web

> With typed routes enabled, Expo CLI will also augment the `react-native` types to support React Native Web. The following changes are made:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With typed routes enabled, Expo CLI also augments the `react-native` types to support React Native Web. The following changes are made:
```
